Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Of all the themes handled by science fiction authors, that of alien contact has been one
of the most consistently popular and fascinating.
For a good reason too. Aliens, whether they be the hostile bug-eyed monsters of the old
pulp magazines or the friendly creatures of close encounters of the third kind,
have always been one of the biggest attractions of science fiction.
In the past, stories of alien contact were usually written as thrillers,
with the sole and simple intention of scaring readers.
HD Wells, The War of the Worlds is probably the best example of that type of story.
But that's changed. Many contemporary writers have provided more thoughtful treatments of aliens,
deepening the realism and the significance of narratives of alien contact.
Of course, before you can have a story of alien contact, you have to have some aliens.
One of the most provocative descriptions of aliens in all of science fiction is found in
Larry Nivens and Jerry Pornell's The Moat in God's Eye.
The success of that book is largely due to the unique and ingenious aliens,
the modis that Niven created for the story.
It's interesting though that Niven says he doesn't really create aliens for a story,
but suggests that it's the other way around.
I always design aliens for themselves. I almost never design an alien to match a story.
The story, some story will eventually include the alien. The alien stands for itself.
There are two particularly fascinating things that Niven incorporated into these modis.
One is the fact that they are not symmetrical. They have a head, torso, legs and arms as humans do,
but the arms are disproportionate. One is small and thin, the other is large and powerful.
Right. Niven says he took that idea from studying the structures of living creatures on Earth.
In that case, I had the idea that I was following a progression with a protozoan,
with an amoeba. You get radio symmetry inside and out.
Move up a goodly distance and you find starfishes with radio symmetry on the outside and bilateral
symmetry on the inside. Move up a little further, you find flat worms and worms of all
stance. At the level of bilateral symmetry inside and out, go as far as a human, you find
bilateral symmetry on the outside and no symmetry, well, half symmetrical on the inside.
The lungs look symmetrical, the kidneys look symmetrical, the intestines look like somebody
dropped a plate of spaghetti. I tried to move on to the next step, bilaterally unsymmetrical
on the outside and I got the original Modi, the engineer for them.
The other ingenious idea Niven developed for the Modi's is the way they construct and use machines.
They're highly skilled tool users, but they have no standard pre-manufactured machines,
parts or tools. They simply alter or reshape whatever they find around them at the time to
suit their needs. Niven says that particular idea just came to him. It seemed interesting and even
logical. I was just playing with the ideas at that point and that one seemed like a fun one.
It also seemed likely enough if you've got a critter with not much intelligence except in
the direction of tool making and tool altering, then why not? The thing has to keep testing its
ability or it will lose it. It might as well be designing something every time it needs a specific
machine. Besides the ingenuity Niven demonstrated in creating the Modi's, he and Pornell also weaved
some unexpected twists into the first contact theme. Our reader interested in aliens are more
specifically in first contact. Can't afford to overlook the Moten Ghat's eye.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian based in Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the
This is Daryl Lane and to Bill Vernon. The so-called New Wave in Science Fiction,
which began in the mid 60s, was simply a new way of writing traditional science fiction.
There were changes for instance and characterization was given more emphasis.
Sex and religion that science fiction had really
New Wave changed the stereotype science fiction formula since the pulp days of the 20s, 30s and 40s.
Frederick Poll, who's been an author and editor and an agent in the field of science fiction,
has something to say about that change.
New Wave was an attempt to I guess 15 years ago or more of a number of writers to break away from
the traditional types of fiction. In fact, most of them didn't want to call it science fiction or
speculative fiction or
and they were interested in writing about interstates,
rolling a lot of them, taking flight.
But in the rather bitter internal school with one author,
a lot of people take sides one way or the other. I think every one of them would have done it.
But we need to remember here that the New Wave wasn't really a planned and deliberate movement
by a unified group of writers. One of the principal proponents of the New Wave,
author Norman Spenred, believes it was just a bunch of diverse writers doing their own thing.
It was an old way, but there was never as a coherent philosophy in school of science fiction,
but there was never a New Wave in the same sense. There were a lot of ways. There are a lot of
different people doing a lot of different things. The people that were identified as the New Wave
were very diverse. What I was actually writing is very different to what Tom Dish was writing,
or Balaard, or Zalazny, or Delaney were also identified as New Wave writers. This stuff is
much more than, you know, Zalazny and Delaney and myself and Balaard and Ardison and Mike,
but there were more differences between our work and the old stuff. There was more difference
within the so-called New Wave than there was within the so-called old Wave.
But Spenred also thinks the New Wave was tightly connected to what was happening in society.
Of course, this mirrored the cultural climate at the time. It mirrored what was happening politically,
it mirrored what was happening in music, it mirrored what was happening in movies,
it was a phenomenon that went through the western civilizations at home.
There are those who say the New Wave is dead. Five-time Hugo winner Larry Nivens says so,
for instance, and offers a reason for his passing. The New Wave is a very persuasive thing,
and very easy to use to justify bad stories. I think that's what killed it. Not the
increased characterization and experiments with typography and story format are a bad thing
in themselves, but it's so easy to use New Wave to justify a bad story. It was bound to go out.
The influence of the New Wave is still around, though. It's left its mark on the field.
Science fiction has been broadened, maybe enhanced somehow because of it.
Frederick Paul states it well.
And the New Wave, if nothing else, taught a bunch of old dinosaurs like Asimov and
Heinlein and me, that there were non-traditional ways of constructing a novel.
See, most of us had grown up when science fiction was in the pulp magazine,
and most of it was written according to some variant of a pulp formula.
Well, it's necessary. I think the New Wave is responsible for teaching us that.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. The award-winning novel Ringworld is probably
Libby Niven's finest work. The Ringworld is an immense ring, large enough to hold 3 million
Earths, and with a thousand-mile high wall to hold in its atmosphere. It also has continents and oceans.
The Ringworld contains trillions of inhabitants of different species,
and derives energy from the sun at its center. Niven recalls where he obtained the idea for such
a fantastic structure. I ran across the concept Dyson's sphere. Dyson, the mathematician, came up
with the concept Dyson's shell, and he was misunderstood to some extent. So,
presently, I ran across an article about Dyson's sphere. A picture that is a golf ball, 93 million
miles in radius, with a sun at the center, and gravity generators all around the outside, so
he would live on the inside, terraform it with oceans and soil and air.
I ran across that and I didn't like it. I thought it could be improved, and I wound up with the Ringworld.
Reader studied the science behind the Ringworld and wrote Niven about seeming inconsistencies in
the design of the immense artifact. Column errors and elaborations because some of them don't really
fit the errors. It's just something that hadn't gotten into the original book.
One of the errors was spotted by some MIT students. It had to do with the instability of the Ringworld.
I suspected the Ringworld was unstable, and I suspected you'd eat attitude jets. I was sure that
the Ringworld was spinning fast enough to permit bazaar and ram jets to be used as attitude jets,
which means you don't have a fuel problem at all. You're burning the solar wind.
But rapidly, some MIT people demonstrated that the Ringworld was unstable, and they were canning it
in the halls at the next World Cup. The Ringworld is unstable. The Ringworld is unstable.
It still took about seven years for anyone to figure out the exact numbers for the instability,
and they are horrifying. The Ringworld, a major solar flare, would have the Ringworld
grinding against its sun in five years. Well, I worked it in the plot. That was one
elaboration or error. Even teenage readers analyzed his Ringworld with a critical scientific eye.
A high school class in Florida got to work on the Ringworld, and their conclusion was that the
Ringworld's worst problem is that all the top soil would wind up in the oceans in about 3,000 years.
There are no earthquakes on the Ringworld. No mountain building forces.
But in a sequel, Ringworld engineers niven attempted to correct such deficiencies.
He devised a way to answer the criticism of the Florida high schoolers.
Okay, that's a tough one. I set up a spill pipe system that runs the bottom from the
sea bottoms under the Ringworld and up over the edge of the Ringwall. That even allows you some
some mind accumulation of useful metals.
Fan response of that sort caused Ringworld engineers to be written,
and although Niven once said he wouldn't write anymore in the Known Space series,
the body of stories to which Ringworld belongs, he's not so sure anymore.
I've given up saying that the Known Space series is dead. There's just no point in it.
I've written five books worth of Known Space stories since I said that.
More on Larry Niven tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson.
He's one of the best-selling authors in the field of science fiction.
A fairly large portion of his work falls into the Known Space series,
a group of stories and novels with a consistent chronology.
Such a series is called a Future History. Niven believes there are some peculiar
attractions a Future History has for a science fiction author.
There had been Future Histories around, Poole Anderson and Robert Heinlein.
And I tell you, I guess we each evolved the idea somewhat independently.
And the idea is that if you carved out a consistent workable future,
it seems a shame to waste it on one story.
You put it in the background because you want the background of a story to seem
bigger than it is. So there are things that are simply unexplained.
And if you think of more to say on a given subject, why you go with it?
And if you think of a story that fits into the background of a previous story,
it allows you to elaborate on that background.
You sometimes you fall in love with the background.
And presently you've got a bunch of stories that link.
Niven has also written some bestselling books that fall outside his known space series.
Three of these, The Mote in God's Eye, Lucifer's Hammer,
and Oath of Fieldty were written in collaboration with Jerry Pranell.
We asked Niven how he and Pranell collaborate.
Hard sometimes, but it always resolves. The question is who is most qualified to write a
that we have both decided needs writing. Before we start, we have the novel all laid out.
We know what's going in virtually everywhere. And if we don't, it feels like we do.
And if we find out we don't, we elaborate as we get to that section.
Okay, the next question is who is qualified to write a given scene? Sometimes it's obvious.
If we're dealing with a mad man, he's mine.
If we're dealing with military operations, it's Jerry's.
Aliens are generally mine. Politics is generally Jerry's. Knowledge of history, generally Jerry's.
And a real evil son of a bitch, Jerry usually creates him. And I usually run with him afterwards.
Niven occasionally writes science fiction humor, or rarity. He talks about his most successful
piece of humor. I suppose I could name old man of steel woman of queen eggs, which has gotten me
the most laughs. I suppose everybody seems to have read it. Those who haven't have heard about it
in a cocktail party. Niven's ready eye for humor can also be appreciated as he reveals that he's
detected one of his own alien creations from Ringworld, a Pearson's puppeteer here on Earth.
I have reason to suspect the Faro puppeteers on Earth.
Look at the characteristics. Forget the shape. They must be masters of biology that hide that
peculiar three-legged two-headed shape. But consider their characteristics. They are cowards.
That is, they want everything utterly safe. No corners on anything. Everything is soft,
surfaces around the puppeteer world. They don't even keep their world near a sun,
regarding it as a runaway fusion reactor, which of course it is. So, desperate regard for safety,
they plus an urge to meddle in the lifestyles of other species. Driving urge to meddle with
practically no restraints attached. What does that remind you of? It seems nearly
certain to me that Ralph Nader is a Pearson's puppeteer.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.